# Deploying Janus

A full deployment of Janus is composed of multiple Janus components and a
PostgreSQL database. The `aggregator` component is responsible for servicing DAP
requests from other protocol participants, (client, collector, or leader) while
the rest of the components are responsible for advancing the aggregation flow
and collect flow, including making requests to the helper. All communication
between components happens implicitly through the database.

A related binary, `janus_cli`, can be used to perform various one-off tasks, and
interacts with the database as well.

## Configuration

Each Janus component, and `janus_cli`, requires its own set of configuration
parameters. Most configuration is provided via a YAML file, while certain secret
configuration parameters are instead provided on the command line or via
environment variables. The path to the YAML configuration file is provided via
the `--config-file` command line flag. Run a component's binary with `--help`
for a complete list of command line arguments.

### Common Configuration

Certain sections of the configuration file are common to all binaries.

#### Database Connection

Each component must be provided a connection string/URL. Note that the database
password may be separately passed on the command line or through an environment
variable, to override (or fill in) the password set in the configuration file.

#### Health Check

Each binary starts an HTTP server to service health check requests from
orchestration systems. The required configuration parameter
`health_check_listen_address` determines what socket address this server listens
on. Orchestration systems should send a GET or HEAD request to the path
`/healthz`. After a successful startup, the HTTP server will respond with `200
OK`.

#### Observability

##### Logging

Each Janus component logs to standard output by default. Verbosity can be
controlled by setting the `RUST_LOG` environment variable to a
[filter][EnvFilter]. Depending on whether standard output is a TTY, a
human-readable or structured JSON log format will be chosen automatically. This
can be overridden with the `force_json_output` and `stackdriver_json_output`
configuration parameters under `logging_config`.

[EnvFilter]: https://docs.rs/tracing-subscriber/latest/tracing_subscriber/struct.EnvFilter.html

##### Metrics

See the documentation on [configuring metrics](CONFIGURING_METRICS.md) for
detailed instructions.

##### Tracing

See the documentation on [configuring tracing](CONFIGURING_TRACING.md) for
detailed instructions.

##### `tokio-console`

The `tokio-console` tool can be used to monitor the Tokio async runtime. For
detailed instructions, see the documentation on [configuring `tokio-console`
support](CONFIGURING_TOKIO_CONSOLE.md).

### `aggregator` configuration

The `aggregator` component requires a socket address to listen on for DAP
requests, and additional parameters to customize batching of uploaded reports
into database transactions. See the [sample configuration
file](samples/aggregator_config.yaml) for details.

### `aggregation_job_creator` configuration

The `aggregation_job_creator` component requires configuration parameters to
determine how frequently it performs its work, and how many reports it will
include in each aggregation job. See the [sample configuration
file](samples/aggregation_job_creator_config.yaml) for details.

### `aggregation_job_driver` configuration

The `aggregation_job_driver` component requires configuration parameters to
determine its schedule for discovering incomplete jobs, maximum per-process
parallelism, duration of leases on jobs, and retry attempts. See the [sample
configuration file](samples/aggregation_job_driver_config.yaml) for details.

### `collection_job_driver` configuration

The `collection_job_driver` component requires the same set of configuration
parameters as the aggregation job driver above. See the [sample configuration
file](samples/collection_job_driver_config.yaml) for details.

## Database

Janus currently requires PostgreSQL 14. Initial database setup can be done in
one of two ways, either by running the script
[`db/schema.sql`](../db/schema.sql) on the database, or running `janus_cli
write-schema` and providing database connection information in its configuration
file.

## `janus_cli provision-tasks`

Currently, the simplest way to set up DAP tasks inside Janus is via the
`janus_cli provision-tasks` subcommand. As above, `janus_cli` must be provided a
configuration file with database connection information, and it must be provided
the datastore encryption key on the command line or via an environment variable.
In addition, it takes the path to another YAML file as a command line argument,
containing descriptions of tasks' parameters. See
[docs/samples/tasks.yaml](samples/tasks.yaml) for an example of this file's
structure.

If `--generate-missing-parameters` is passed, one or more fields may be omitted
from a task's parameters, and `janus_cli` will fill in randomly generated
values. This is applicable to the task ID, the VDAF verify key, authentication
tokens, and the aggregator HPKE keypair. Depending on which fields are
automatically generated, you may wish to pass `--echo-tasks` as well, to show
what values were used.
